---
layout: page
title:  "Work"
date:   2018-12-25
---

A month and a half ago I quit my cushy technical desk job with nothing lined up.
I moved across the country back to the city in which I grew up and I've been
existing somewhat comfortably. Inevitably I'll have to refill the money tank,
but I quit to give myself time to think about how to do so.

I quit because I was dissatisfied with my job and my surrounding life. I felt
like (and was) a small cog in a large machine; I felt siloed and it seemed it
would be difficult to change my situation. I would take weeks to finish projects
and feel that they didn't have any bearing on anyone else, inside the company or
out. No one seemed to care.

More than that, I wasn't excited to do my work. I think more dynamism would have
been helpful, i.e., more chances to try things outside the realm of familiarity.
This might have required being more aggressive about choosing projects for
myself, or even switching teams. But I also think identifying ways to challenge
myself within my company's system -- gamifying my work -- could have helped.
How fast can I complete this project? How many extra tickets can I pick up this
week? How many customers can I assist on our mailing list? Can I increase the
number of my peers' projects I review, or review them in more depth? Are there
projects I can work on outside of my team? There were any number of arbitrary
goals I could have set for myself that would have required reevaluating my work
habits and growing. I kind of like challenges for their own sake, so maybe this
would have made work enjoyable.

In any case, I was pretty disillusioned with my job. I was also pretty
disillusioned with my life outside of work. It felt like I was "on a treadmill",
to quote a teammate: I would wake up, go to the gym, go to the office, spend
eight or nine hours there, go home, spread myself out on the living room sofa
for a few hours, and then spend the rest of the evening shooting the shit with
my roommates or brooding in my room about how I was wasting my life on stuff I
didn't care about and how I didn't have the time or energy to pursue what I
wanted to. I felt surrounded by people only in my industry and I found myself
wishing I were still in school, not obligated to do anything or spend time with
anyone, free to meet new people, take up new hobbies, and take whatever classes
I wanted. (It was in this headspace that I read and was strongly influenced by
William Deresiewicz's "Excellent Sheep", too.)

Oh, and I was pretty ambivalent about the mission of my company, and of the
missions of most companies in my industry, in general. I felt kind of gross
about supporting them because I couldn't work out the externalities: are we
having an overall positive or overall negative impact on humanity? I wanted to
work at a company where 1. I actually used and derived value from the product;
and 2. I was confident the product was valuable to others. Part of my hope for
my period of funemployment was that I'd learn how to differentiate "good" firms
from "bad".

So I applied for a masters program in the liberal arts in a different city. The
plan was to spend a few years immersing myself in the humanities (which I had
never really done) and meeting people from various walks of life. There wasn't
anything I particularly wanted to study -- there was no burning question or set
of questions I wanted to answer. I just wanted to not feel trapped and to not
feel that my job was wasting me away. I wanted to be free, as I was as an
undergraduate.

After applying for the program I left my job and moved. It's been a month and a
half. What's changed?

...

My values have changed. Stability, structure, and money are now more desirable
to me. Of course time and rest are, too -- but the me that left my job left
because of unfulfilment at the top of Maslow's Hierarchy. (I believe these
levels are called "esteem" and "self actualization.") Without money and
stability, one's thoughts are directed more toward the lower levels, which
revolve around physiological and safety needs. Once one has a stable,
well-paying job, then one can satisfy nearly all of one's needs, and one can
direct their attenion -- fully -- toward their friends and hobbies, both for a
deeper sense of fulfillment and for plain old entertainment.

This is incredibly simple to grok in the abstract, but I didn't understand it on
a gut level until being unemployed.

The phrase that keeps coming to mind is "psychological safety:" the lack of fear
or stress due to one's financial and living situations. Let me deal with being
alone and bored; these are luxuries! Now that I've lived a little, I'd prefer
them, any day, to the stress and uncertainty of paying for a cheap room and
living with strangers, or of living with one's parents, and being unsure of
one's earning potential. More than just about anything else, I yearn for the
confidence that my landlord won't yell at me, that I won't step on my roommates'
toes, and that I'll have enough to afford my hobbies... today, next month, and
next year.

Freedom! Freedom is fantastic. I don't want to feel limited. I want to feel
comfortable doing whatever I decide that I want to do. I don't want to feel that
a purchase is out of my budget, if it genuinely supports one of my hobbies or
needs. I've been pained enough by the prospect of not having money, and by the
unpleasant side effects of not having as much as one would like; and I've
witnessed enough of the sorrows of those who don't have enough. Maybe this is a
symptom of getting older, or maybe just a core part of my personality, but
whatever. I believe it's okay to pursue a career because it satisfies one's
financial needs and desires -- especially around one's desired living situation
and one's hobbies.

Previously my idealism told me just to quit my job because working made
reflection and self-improvement difficult. But my sense of idealism has shifted:
I believe a plain-old career can still be constructive and fulfulling, not
merely in the context of one's day-to-day work, but more broadly. (My next step
is to try this out and see if it's true.)

(Note: there are also the
options of 1. passive income and 2. starting one's own business. These are not
mutually exclusive, but one *requires* *not just* a safety net to do this, but
a *comfortable* one in which one can maintain focus on one's work and is not
bothered by one's lack of a regular paycheck. Part of my plan when I start my
next job is to make my free time productive by investigating channels for
passive income and for entrepreneurship.)

...

What about my feelings about my day-to-day work? I was an engineer at my
previous job, but the kind of engineering I was doing was very narrow. "Software
engineering" as a field is quite broad and there are a lot of variables to
consider when thinking about how enjoyable a slice of the space might be (that I
haven't yet explored). Yes, it's true that I didn't think my former job was
exciting. In fact, it was pretty boring and I could tell I wasn't growing. I'm
glad I got out.

As far as new work goes, let's say that I'm excited to try a different slice of
this industry, to tune the knobs to different positions and see if it's any
different. I have realistic expectations about the work itself -- I don't think
the engineering work or concepts themselves will be any more enjoyable -- but
perhaps the context around the work will be more interesting. If it's not, then
I'll try to pivot again. In fact, I expect that trying to pivot sooner rather
than later will benefit me. My homework is to reflect on how to do this and to
try stuff: talk to people and get scrappy. Just because I don't know what else
is out there or how to go about pivoting doesn't mean I should pretend nothing
else exists or be passive about my future.

(Note: the above turned into an action item. I realized I didn't know why I
wasn't applying for other jobs but that it seems that I want to apply for other
jobs. I'm going to investigate how instead of unwittingly pigeonholing myself.)

80k Hours has a bit about finding personal fit in one's career. It goes
something like: if you don't know what you want to do, don't armchair theorize
what you'll vibe with. Instead, go out and try different things, and adjust the
next step based on your past experiences. I think I agree with this approach and
I'm going to try it, as described above.

...

What about business ethics? I no longer care about "having an impact", since
"impact" is impossible to fully define and measure. Instead I care about
improving myself and my peers through my work, about learning as much as I can
from my job, and about working on a product that excites me. As far as ethics
goes, I'd probably rule out stuff on the level of helping to develop a bomb, but
that's all I can say for sure.

Aside from the bomb example, I think it's pretty difficult to say whether a
product is "good" or "bad" for people. I have my opinions about how I'd like
to spend my time -- what is "good" or "bad" for me -- but I can't say with
certainty whether scrolling through a social media platform's news feed or
getting in a heated "debate" online is bad for anyone else. Maybe I'm not
being charitable enough toward my own perspective, but I think it really is
hard to defend, and if those products didn't exist then those people would
find other things to do that I'd also find dissatisfying. And I don't care
enough to change everyone's beliefs and behavior to match what I think is good
(never mind that this is a flat-out bad idea).

So I'm going to abandon the search for a "pure" company or product and settle
for something I think is cool, or that I might use.

...

What about the prospect of life just being a cycle of working and enjoying my
free time after work and on the weekends? Yes, of course I do want my career to
be fulfilling, but I expect there will be periods during which the fulfillment
comes more from the challenges I set for myself and from my taking
responsibility for my problems at work, than from the mission. In fact, this is
all one really has control over, as an employee: how one thinks about one's
tasks. Of course, the smaller and less mature a company, the more one individual
can direct its course, but there are no guarantees, and I don't know that the
ability to effect such change would itself create a greater sense of
fulfillment.

Also, I don't think there's anything bad about this structure. Yes, coming home
at the same time every day and just pursuing hobbies in one's free time seems
like it'd get old after not very long -- I've done this before, and indeed it
has gotten old -- but that's not the only thing one can do with one's free time.
The structure, the psychological safety, the health, and obviously the resources
allow one to reflect on one's values and ambitions, what one thinks is
important, and about how to work toward more meaningful goals. And one can of
course move from comteplation to action. (Contemplation is a long-term habit;
without it, one can make nothing happen that is truly meaningful to oneself.)

But, I admit that I probably wouldn't be doing this kind of work if I didn't
need the money. This makes it easy to think of work as just a permanent social
construct, as something you have to do since everyone else does it. There's not
really an alternative, right? You have to make money *somehow*.

This kind of thinking is dangerous. In the worst case, I end up working
behind a desk for someone else for the rest of my life and it really is a
treadmill and the years go by and I look back and wonder where my life went. I
feel like this comes from not questioning the wake-work-rest cycle. I can't let
this happen.

So, as I'm writing all this, I want to keep in mind that I don't want this
post to turn into a list of justifications for this kind of lifestyle, and
reasons that working for someone else is great. Compared with not doing
anything, yes, it's good to earn money; compared with having zero structure,
yes, this lifestyle has merit. (For me, at least.) But it's not the best, by
any means. (Again, for me.) Just the next step that will gradually enable me to
live the kind of life I really want to live. And in the meanwhile, I'm trying to
figure out how to make the path as fulfilling and livable as posible.

(Note: the above led me to a few ideas that will probably form the basis for a
separate post.)

...

There are other things to touch on, but where does all of that leave us right
now?

The next step is to find a job which is sufficiently different from my previous
one but which allows me to meet my material needs and satisfy my psychological
comforts, and which permits a good work-life balance. Once I have this job I'll
focus on making the most of it (gamifying it by setting challenges and taking
more responsibility) and on developing alternate income streams (passive income,
entrepreneurship). This will take more planning and structure than I'm used to
but ultimately I think that will be good for me. The goal of this is to get me
to a point where: my alternate income streams are successful and allow me to
work less (or to work as much but make substantially more money); or if not
that, my work experiences and reflections on them have given me an idea of what
the next potentially fulfilling job might be.

Hopefully the reasons for all of this are clear from the above.
