---
layout: page
title:  "Sleep"
date:   2020-11-25
---

I wake; I rise. After finishing my morning ritual, I grab my journal and pen from my closet shelf, and sit at my desk.  Journal open, my thoughts begin:

What temperature was the AC set to?  Was it programmed to change over time, or to shut off?  Were our thoughts racing, or was our mind calm?  For how long did we meditate?  Did we exercise an adequate amount and with sufficient intensity?  Did we spend enough time outside while the sun was still out?  Consume any drugs?  How much caffeine, and when did we stop?  What about water?  What about yesterday's sleep -- how was it, and how much might it have affected last night's?  What attire did we wear while sleeping, and what bedding did we use?  ...

And so they continue.  The checklist of a dozen or so items comes easily, and if any piece is forgotten, it's bound to be in one of this week's earlier entries.  But really, at this point it's so well ingrained that going through the list requires neither much time nor effort.

Why this madness?  What would lead someone -- by most appearances a sane, healthy twenty-something -- to go through this obsessive exercise every day?

The importance of sleep cannot be overstated.  The quality of one's sleep affects _everything_: most directly physical and mental energy, but obviously these have cascading effects on most everything else: mood, performance, social interactions...  And the effects compound.  It's said that six hours of sleep nightly for two weeks makes one as effective as if one had just stayed up two days straight, and that our self-perception adjusts to meet our sleep deprivation, so that we're eventually not aware that we're tired.  And at some point, the damage dealt by poor sleep might be irreversible.

We may have been sleeping poorly for months or years, but we might not even know it.  And we might not even know what it would feel like if we were properly rested, every day.

And yet.  We often have minimal, questionable insight into the factors that affect our sleep, and precisely how they do so.  We are mysteriously intricate biological machines.  Yes, the items on our checklist are certainly relevant, but how much weight to give each?  Might the weights change over time?  Could there be other factors that we haven't yet considered?  Even after accounting for what seem to be the most important -- for example, retiring and rising at the same times every day, limited nighttime light exposure, a cool air temperature -- how do we know whether changes to these inputs affect our sleep quality?

------

I am not a scientist.  I have neither the time nor the responsibility to run controlled experiments on myself and produce an accurate model of how these factors affect my sleep.  But sleep _is_ important -- maybe _the_ most important lifestyle factor affecting happiness, up there with diet and exercise and social connection -- and I can't just ignore it.  I must give it its due attention, and at least try to improve it, even if imprecisely, even if the process is mostly a fruitless walk in the dark.

So yes, this habitual questioning is fueled partly by a desire to improve, to live as energetically as possible.  And even though I'm not a scientist, it's also fueled by a genuine excitement to run a long-term experiment on myself, and to collect and analyze data, even if my notebooks and the methods available to me are scrappy.

Obviously it's possible to spend too much time trying to measure and analyze one's sleep, and while my ten to twenty minutes a day might seem like a lot to others, I might defend it, at least for now.  Hopefully at some point I reach a comfortable baseline of regular high quality sleep, maybe an eight out of ten, and at that point, the daily methodical tracking is no longer necessary.

What am I really after?  The feeling of sweater weather; the crisp awareness that accompanies new beginnings; the feeling of being so fully awake and engrossed in the present that comes after the deepest of slumbers, the most restful of nights.  The true feeling of being alive, due only to the proper alignment of my body's restorative processes.  A good night's sleep might not be sufficient or even necessary for this feeling, but it seems reasonable to think it would help.