---
layout: page
title:  "Coffee with Tom"
date:   2020-11-29
---

A friend of mine -- call him Tom -- just signed a lease in Astoria after half a year of sleeping on friends' couches in Manhattan.  We last met before the city shut down in March, so it was long past time we catch up.

We arranged to meet at a cafe near Tompkins Square Park on a brisk late autumn Sunday morning.  I arrive a few minutes early and stand outside the cafe, shifting my gaze up and down the block every minute or two.  A few gazes later, Tom approaches: leather desert boots, slim dark blue jeans, black puffer jacket, black earmuffs.  It's not that cold, and not even windy, but the guy's got sensitive ears.  We each buy a cup of coffee, then walk to the park and find a bench along one of the paths branching out of the park's central square.  As we sit I invite him to catch me up on everything that's happened since our last encounter, and by way of introduction he said he'd tell me about his experience being homeless, or as he put it, "nomadic".

You see, Tom's the kind of guy who doesn't need a lot to live relatively happily.  He grew up in a small rent-controlled apartment in the West Village that could be called "cozy": cat hair peppered most surfaces, the decades-unfinished wooden finishings were warped and the floorboards' nails stuck out unevenly, and he bunked in an eight by ten with his older brother.  He got used to it, and his last apartment -- just before the pandemic -- had similar vibes: fifth floor of a walkup in a pre-war brownstone, a third "flex" bedroom that could fit a queen and nothing else, and floors so slanted a tennis ball would roll effortlessly from one side of the apartment to the other.  In case this doesn't paint enough of a picture, his list of flexible living situation accomplishments is long:  in his junior and senior years he was in a sixty square footer containing the seven college students' apartment's only laundry machine.  While working his first job out of college he lived in a triangular closet beneath a stairwell in a six-month Bay Area Airbnb.  On a summer sabbatical he volunteered at a Sri Lankan Buddhist monastery for a few weeks and slept beneath a mosquito net with no AC.  The list goes on.  Let's just say that Tom is by nature pretty flexible and a bit of a minimalist.

You could see how I expected that Tom wouldn't have minded bumming around the city, moving from one temporary living room sleeping quarters to the next, for a few months.  It wouldn't have surprised me if he said he'd found it satisfying: after all, he doesn't like being burdened by earthly possessions, and he especially doesn't like moving what possessions he has, so this might have been his chance to pare down and truly live life out of a backpack.

Turns out this guess was a bit mistaken.

Tom acknowledged that he is flexible and doesn't own much.  And while he's got a prestigious job he sort of enjoys and earns a comfortable six-figure salary, he -- like many peers in our social milieu -- isn't married to it.  He kind of feels like a cog and he dreams of a life where he can exist freely, outside of the capitalist machine, and not worry about saving money for retirement.  Some "career" ideas he's bounced around include being an entrepreneur or digital nomad, an academic, a blogger or writer, or a digital visual artist (good luck with that one, man).  He'd maybe work six months a year, and maybe he'd travel, attending conferences and giving talks and networking.  I kinda get what he's going for, but in my view he romanticizes it a bit more than our other friends.

But, Tom clarified, the thing about being that kind of nomad is that you get to set your own schedule.  Yes, you might travel a lot, but you know roughly how long you'll be in any one place -- and even if you don't, at least you're the one who ultimately chooses when to leave.  You're not subject to the external circumstances of the people whose rooms you're staying in, the progress of hospitals developing vaccines, or the loose group of friends and acquaintences you're trying to coordinate apartment viewings with.

Tom felt that over the past six months, because his living arrangements were subject to all those external forces, he wasn't able to truly settle into any of the places he was staying and make it feel like home.  Could he have bought or rearranged furniture?  Sure, but buying furniture means later selling or moving it, and this wouldn't have solved the fundamental problem of not feeling invested in, personally attached to, or comfortable at his crash pad.  He didn't mention it, but there's also the contextual fact (perhaps clear to current readers, maybe not so clear to readers from the distant future) that his office has been closed since his last lease ended, so he's been spending way more time holed up than he normally would, compounding these feelings.

He seemed kind of conflicted.  On the one hand, it looked like a weight he'd been burdening for half a year had been lifted from his shoulders -- no more bags beneath the eyes, no more hunched up shoulders or hands stiffly tucked in his pockets, no more stone-cold, ruminating gazes into the infinite planes of brick and concrete.  He was clearly relieved to no longer have short-term moving logistics on his mind, and he looked years younger for it.

On the other hand, he said that signing a lease and buying high quality furniture for his home office has made him feel more attached to his current nine-to-five life, and therefore somehow further from his dream career pivot.  Yes, if he suddenly had another quarter-life crisis and decided to do another six-month immersive language program in Brazil, he could find a subletter.  Even in the worst case, if he had to stomach the rent and throw out all his newly acquired possessions, he could do so without ruining his retirement.  Nothing literally prevents him from acting on such a whim, but he says he really likes his high-ceiling skylit flat, his nightly dishwasher-loading roommate, and his brownstone-lined neighborhood.  He said it's too soon to tell whether he'd renew the lease, which makes sense, but I'd never heard him talk so much and so happily about any of his previous living situations.

I get it.  It's an interesting question, how to balance the angsty twenty-something freedom and infinite potential that comes from being propertyless, with the convenience and peace of mind and commitment that comes from long-term property.  Tom and a bunch of our friends have that probabilistic Wall Street quant mindset that humans are by nature bad at predicting the future, and that the further out one is trying to predict, the harder it gets.  A natural consequence of believing this is that if one is being honest with oneself, it's hard to be certain of the future, or confident in it, in a mathematical sense.  And therefore it's hard to be confident that large financial and emotional investments in property or belongings are worthwhile -- because things can, and probably will, change.  Preferences, relationships, necessities, health, goals, identity.  We think we know ourselves, and five years later we look back and admire how far we've come -- or wonder at how far we've fallen.

Our converation got pretty philosophical at this point, if you couldn't already tell.  We agreed that trendy lifestyle labels like "minimalism" or "frugality" aren't uniformly good for everyone -- they're probably good for some people some of the time, but probably not for everyone all of the time -- but they're hard to ignore since our generation so visibly flies these movements' flag banners.  We brought the discussion back to earth by speculating that it might be possible to, for example, have a long-term crash-pad mortgage that Tom rents out whenever his muse summons him for another sabbatical, and returns to when he's sufficiently scratched his travel itch.  And I mentioned that mortgages don't require signing away his next forty years in blood -- they can be sold.  He raised his eyebrows and asked a lot of questions about this, so I guess he hadn't known about it.  A little surprising for a guy working in finance.

As a brief aside, I should mention that Tom has been pretty clear that he doesn't currently have strong aspirations to be a father or to settle down.  He's definitely in the market for love -- he just signed up for Hinge's premium service, after a months-long dating hiatus while figuring out moving logistics.  But he's said on multiple occasions that he just doesn't see himself as a family man.  In larger group settings he doesn't explain why, but I'm closer to Tom than most and the two of us have peeled back the onion once or twice.  It's an interesting topic worth digging into, but maybe we'll save it for a different time.

Another agreement we reached is that it's okay to take the L on some investments.  Despite having grown up in Greenwich Village -- a neighborhood now replete with luxury condos, Starbucks sandwiched between jewelery stores, and tourists taking selfies in front of celebrities' stoops -- his family's income afforded them food stamps and annual trips to the Salvation Army thrift shop.  Ergo, as he sees it, he's been trained for nearly two decades to be extremely frugal in every situation.  But now that he's earning more only three years into his career than his parents ever earned together during theirs, he knows that his natural tendency to always seek out the best deals can do more harm than good.  We both conceded that spending three hours on the phone with customer service trying to return a $50 hoodie, while tempting, would probably cause more stress than to just accept the sunk dollar cost.  (I'm pretty sure Tom earns more than a hoodie per hour, if you wanna look at it that way.)  We also agreed that spontaneous, unnecessary purchases bring us joy -- and, of course, that some necessary purchases are just downright expensive.  And man, New York ain't cheap.

We talked for two and a half or three hours, getting up to stretch our legs and circle the park every now and then.  Our conversation meandered, and didn't have any grand conclusions or clean wraps.  But it left me with a different feeling than any in recent memory, so I've spent some time thinking about why.  Here's my brief take.

I wouldn't say that Tom has become a new person since we last hung out, but he's changed.  The simplest way to put it is that he seems more like an adult now.  It could just be that we spent a lot of time relating his current situation to his possible future paths -- in the way two Adults catching up over coffee in a park might -- but something about the way he spoke and carried himself was subtly different.  Before his most recent nomadic phase, he imagined his living situations as suited to a recent college graduate, which is to say,  someone who is still okay living as they did in college.  Okay with temporary and cheap accommodations, hesitant to commit, unwilling to assume financial responsibility for one's choices.  Now, he's reimagined himself as ready to accept the risks of committing to Big Life Decisions, knowing there's a good chance he'll later change his mind, confident that he'll be able to handle the consequences.  Knowing that these risky decisions are necessary for personal exploration and growth.

He seemed more sure of himself: he knows a bit more of what he wants, he knows the price, and he's willing to pay. He's wrestling with the thick shrubbery of his old habits, hacking at them piece by piece with a machete, slowly paving his way through the dense jungle of personality left by his teenage and college years. Yes, the bigger questions remain unresolved: career pivots, family plans, settling down; much of his uncertainty and hesitation is still there.  But I'd bet that Tom is going to tackle these questions, and that he's going to do so with gusto.  Much of what he told me was backed by a barely perceptible attitude, somewhere between latent and budding, of both knowing that these questions have no correct answers, and having the confidence to try to answer them anyway.

The next time we hang out, it'll be too cold to justify spending so long outside, so I'm sure we'll end up at Tom's place.  I can't wait to see what he's done; the tease doesn't want to show me any photos, so for now I can only imagine the exposed brick walls, the double monitor home office setup, the mini forest on the window sill, the skylights, the newly renovated walnut floorboards, the cabinet shelf lined with six bags of coffee beans of different varieties, the fridge stocked full of kombucha.  Quite the upgrade from a literal living room couch and an air mattress.  He deserves it.  Just as he deserves the self-confidence and personal growth that will come from his change of mindset, he deserves the self-dignity that will surely come from always having a month's supply of kombucha.

Who knows: we joked that maybe in five or ten years' time, he'll come to acquire an Eames.  And even though our friends would forever judge him, if he himself chose the path that led to that decision, he'd deserve it and everything that comes with it, too.