---
layout: post
title:  "Sprout's Quest for How to Live"
date:   2021-08-21
---

*Sprout:*  O wise Elders, I do not know what to do with my life, and I ask you to bestow upon me your advice.  Here is my situation.  My basic needs are met.  I want something more than the 40-year grind – something that will be more satisfying, that will truly resonate with the rhythm of my heart.  I want to create, and I want to contribute to something greater than myself.  Though I have not lived a long time, I have also not lived a short time, and I have had many diverse experiences and accomplished feats others would consider impressive.  And yet, nothing excites me to get out of bed;  nothing perhaps except for this continual quest to figure out what it is that I must do.

*Elder 1:*  Sprout, there is no right answer to the question, “what is the best thing for me to do?”  You must accept this, and you must accept that nothing you do will bring you continual joy or satisfaction.  Even what you think is your life’s calling – if you ever find such a pursuit – will have its valleys, its boring moments.  It may cease to be your “life’s calling”, and you may find a new one.  So moment-to-moment happiness or even satisfaction is not what you should strive for.  Rather, the answer for you is to take responsibility.  To know that you do not know the answer, and to choose something in spite of the uncertainty – anything that resonates even a little bit – and to commit yourself to it.  Even through the boring and emotionless moments, even through the internal battles.  This commitment is necessary for your growth.  You do not need to commit yourself to said pursuit forever – it may be for just a week or a month to begin with, and if it is clear that it is truly painful or not worth your while then you may stop – but you must commit for some time.  Notably, you and only you must choose the pursuit – you are a unique individual, and no one will be able to choose a pursuit for you in a way that you will find satisfying.

*Sprout:*  Thank you, Elder 1.  I shall consider this.  Elder 2, what do you think?

*Elder 2:*  Elder 1 and I see things differently.  If I may, I shall say that you worry too much about choosing the right pursuit.  You can always find a correct answer the question, “what is the best thing for me to do?”, by listening to yourself.  Yes, your emotions will sway to and fro, and you may pick up one pursuit on Monday only to abandon it on Tuesday because you have grown bored with it or because something more attractive has come along and drawn your attention away.  You may proceed through life this way never “accomplishing” anything in the traditional sense of a long-term project.  But you will never be your own task-master and your own servant, in the manner described by Elder 1.  And there is nothing inherently wrong with flitting from pursuit to pursuit as your whims dictate.  As long as you truly listen to yourself, and act according to the rhythm of your heart, you will live a fulfilling life.

*Sprout:*  Thank you, Elder 2.  This is very different indeed from Elder 1’s advice.  You have both lived long and accrued much wisdom, and each of your recommended courses is sound.  But I do not know which to choose!  Elder 3, what do you say?

*Elder 3:*  Although their advice differ, consider that both of my peers may be right.  Yes, it is perhaps paradoxical.  I do not mean to give you a sort of koan upon which to meditate in the abstract:  this reconciliation is quite actionable.  The reconciliation is to view their suggestions as worth experimenting with, and to view yourself as an experimenter: someone who seeks and gains knowledge by performing real actions in the real world.  You may for one phase of life – be it a day or month or a year – decide to follow Elder 1’s strategy.  And you may or may not find it fruitful, but at least you will have learned something.  And then for the next phase of life, you may decide to follow Elder 2’s strategy.  And again, you may or may not find it fruitful, but you will have gained knowledge that can be earned only through experience.  And you may discover – or even invent for yourself! – other such philosophies, and experiment with them for the subsequent phases.  And through doing so, you may find the aspects of these approaches that resonate with you, and those that do not.  The search will likely be continual, and perhaps this approach itself merges aspects of both Elder 1’s and Elder 2’s suggestions.  Perhaps it is a perspective which will allow you to navigate between them – and whatever other approaches you may find – with some sense of purpose and fulfillment, rather than an entirely different approach.  But I encourage you to consider this narrative, this lens, this paradigm.

*Sprout:*  I see.  Thank you, Elder 3.  This is most interesting.  I like this idea of viewing myself as an empiricist.  I shall go out into the world and conduct these experiments.