---
layout: post
title:  "Notes on Identity, Community, and Meaning"
date:   2021-07-25
---

The older I get, the more I seem to truly want only a deeply fulfilling social life, and good health.  The rest seems to not matter too much on a short-term gut level, perhaps given that I have a baseline satisfactory job.

In high school and college, I had strong intellectual interests, and they aligned with the values that were celebrated by the communities I belonged to: my classmates and teachers.  But I don’t think it’s that I started out with deep intellectual interests:  rather, I wanted to feel valued and purposeful, and so early on I chose the game of academics.  The more I forced myself to study and do my homework, regardless of how boring it felt, the more praise I received from my teachers and the more of an identity and reputation I gained among my peers:  nerdy, hard-working, disciplined, focused.

I liked this identity and I latched onto it.  And once I got going, the momentum kept me going, and maybe to some extent I did learn to enjoy the intellectual pursuits for their own sake.  But not entirely, because of course whatever I was studying somehow fit into the framework of my academic community and the values it held.

Another way to frame this is that I learned to pursue something at a deep, focused level only if I was part of a community that valued it.  And I did not learn to pursue anything otherwise – because studying took up most of my time, and the contrast between the feeling of doing something for school, and the feeling of doing something not for school (and thus not part of any community), made me lean further into my studies.  They simply felt more fulfilling than most other (solo) endeavors.

That is, I’ve never developed the skill of pursuing something for its own sake – aside from exercise and diet, and meaningful relationships.  So I’ll refine that statement:  I’ve never developed the skill of pursuing something intellectual or creative for its own sake.

After graduating, I found myself in left-leaning, well-educated cities that celebrated freedom.  But partly because of those attributes, and partly because I didn’t have to try to find my academic community as a young adult, and thus did not build the skill of finding and sticking with community, it has always felt difficult to find a long-term community since leaving school.  And for various reasons, work has satisfied neither my craving for community, nor for craft.

And this is where I am today.  I wake up on the weekends and all I truly want to do, on a gut level, is exercise and see friends.  There is little developed sense of wanting to read, or play music, or volunteer.  But my identity has changed less than my biology has:  part of me still wants to pursue intellectual hobbies, because I identified as someone who did those and derived value from them for so many years.  But when I try to pursue reading or studying or writing code, my biology tells me:  these are not fulfilling;  do not do these, but instead seek people, and seek exercise.  Go outside and be an animal;  don’t stay in your box.

I suspect that I am still capable of deep intellectual and creative pursuits, but to be sustainable at this point in my life, they must fit into a social framework.  Here are some ideas – not all directly related to the above train of thoughts – to help motivate me to keep searching for activities and communities:

- From a state of not exercising, exercising does not feel desirable.  But from a state of exercising, there’s enough positive momentum and good feelings from exercise that exercise becomes desirable and self-sustaining.  Maybe creative and intellectual pursuits – in a sufficient social framework – are similar, where the initial hurdle requires significant willpower to overcome, but afterwards the momentum will propel me forward with less effort.
- Intellectual and creative pursuits are fulfilling partly because they can make me more well-rounded, similar to how exercise and spending time nourishing my existing relationships can make me more well-rounded.  Other reasons they are fulfilling are that they can make me more attractive to others later or grant me access to communities that are based on those pursuits, and because they can later allow me to teach, which is also satisfying.
- The feeling of challenging myself is fulfilling.  Figuring out how to have sustainable intellectual and creative pursuits is challenging.  Exercise and homework often feel difficult in the moment, but satisfying afterwards, and perhaps the same will be true in these domains.
- I’ve already figured out how to play the dating game, and I’m playing it.  It’s not daunting;  it’s mostly about execution at this point.  But before I knew how to play it, I was reluctant to do so, because of the uncertainty and the frustration I’d felt in the past at having failed to figure out how to go about dating.  Maybe I just need to figure out the game of finding a community in which to practice a craft as an adult, and then it will similarly feel less daunting and be mostly about execution.
- Depth and focus are inherently satisfying.  But again, remember to search for them within a social context.

Another idea is that being part of any long-term community, that isn’t necessarily focused on a particular activity – be it a romantic relationship or a meditation group – could be sufficient to help me sustain my solo activities.  The activities would not be done in the social context, but they would be framed by it.  Maybe it’s similar to how work can feel more meaningful when you’re providing for a significant other or a family, instead of for just yourself: “work” is an activity that is done independent of belonging to the “family” community, but belonging to the “family” community helps give meaning to “work”.  “Studying history” is independent of belonging to the “meditation group” community, but perhaps it can feel meaningful if one belongs to the “meditation group” community.  Whether or not this reasoning holds, it’s probably worth experimenting with trying to join such communities – namely, a romantic relationship and an activity-independent support group – partly to see if they help frame independent, possibly solo activities.

Lastly, a few notes for my future self:  please be optimistic and don’t forget to enjoy yourself.  Stress and loneliness are physically and mentally unhealthy;  as they say, all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.  And remember that even the greatest philosophers disagreed over how to meaningfully spend one’s time, so there’s no “right” answer.  This quest – to figure out how to make life more meaningful – is inherently meaningful.

Now, time to get experimenting!