---
layout: post
title:  "Lockdown"
date:   2021-05-09
---

The real challenge of the lockdown for me has been the cabin fever: the internal battles I'm unsure are just mind games I'm in the habit of playing with myself, or tugs of war that my biology has wired into me.

Growing up sharing a 350-square foot one-bedroom apartment with two elderly parents and a cat, our living room containing my dad's office and my loft bed, I should be used to staring at the same four walls for years at a stretch.  Lockdown for a year and a half, lived from apartments more than double the size?  Psh.  Come on.  Well, I wish.  As a kid, I was at school for half the day, went to physical social venues on the weekends, and studied nose-to-the-grindstone on weeknights.  Cabin fever was a rare feeling back then.

The most obvious difference is that now, the vast majority of my time is spent at home, alone, in my room.  The workday is manageable, and early on I settled into a comfortable 9-to-5 rhythm that smoothly carried me to, well, 5 o'clock.  But come 5 -- to speak nothing of Friday evening or Saturday morning -- that internal _something_ would begin:  the tightening chest, the scatterbrained lack of focus, the monologue that would offer a mix of helpful suggestions and downward-spiraling thought cycles:  "I should go for a run by the river," followed by, "it's so hard to spend my free time productively."

The model of my thoughts and feelings that I've constructed as an adult includes an axiom that my physical surroundings have a large effect on my emotions, and therefore on my ability to make progress toward my goals, and to enjoy myself.  Stay in the same place for too long and I get antsy; bounce around different spaces, each separated by a few minutes' walk outside, and I stay even keel.

Here's an example: I like to read and write, and I often do so using my computer.  Before the pandemic, if I wanted to read or write but my internal state led me to believe that I couldn't effectively do so at home because I'd already spent too much time in my room, at my desk, I could walk for 5 minutes to a cafe, order a cup of tea, plop myself down in a cozy corner for an hour or two, and read or write undisturbed.  The people, the visual stimulus -- basically the temporary change of scenery -- would convince something inside me that I could do it, and that stir-craziness would not visit me.  But when all the cafes are closed, and that feeling does visit me, all I can do to change scenery is... at best, to move to the living room.  Okay, but nowhere near as refreshing as a "third place."

That same part of me that thinks that I'm hands down less effective and content if I'm confined to the same physical space, worries that I'm at greater risk of falling into old, comfortable, unhealthy patterns of behavior -- or just at greater risk of stagnating.  Going for a walk after work brings short-term relief and makes the evening more tolerable, but won't produce a short story if done every day for a week.  Unlike, you know, walking to that cafe with a notebook and actually writing.

Anyway, there's a lot of literature that suggests that our surroundings _do_ affect our mood, and anecdotally I feel that they generally apply to me, but I won’t keep scribbling about each and every cause and effect.

A few months ago I came across an article or a podcast in which the narrator, interested in meditation, described an encounter with a monk.  The narrator entered a cave, found the monk sitting alone in the dark, and introduced himself.  The monk stood up and greeted the narrator with an ear-to-ear smile.  The narrator asked if the monk was lonely or got sick of focusing on his breath for 12 hours a day, every day, for months at a time.  The monk said no.

I'm not suggesting I embrace an ascetic lifestyle and sit in a cave for a year, but I keep coming back to this story and wondering if there's something to learn.  Maybe I can be more like the monk: instead of my internal model reinforcing feelings of restlessness, maybe it can learn to be okay with those feelings and allow me to write for another 30 minutes alone in my living room, worry-free.  Maybe it's not the kind of behavior I want to sustain in the long-run, but I could see it being useful while those cafes are still closed, or at limited capacity.

In my junior year of high school, I spent a week or two of my winter break working solo on my first big programming project: a top-down, dungeon-exploration PC game.  I saw under my loft bed, at my desk, for hours and hours, progress paused only by an occasional walk through my neighborhood's snow-covered streets.  Despite the visual monotony, my internal monologue rarely entertained the usual thoughts -- that I should spend less time in my room, or in front of my computer, or that I should spend more time socializing.  Likely this is not sustainable forever; even if it were, there's so much life to live outside of one's box, and so many amazing people to share experiences with, that such a prolonged ascetic, minimalist lifestyle is probably not desirable.

But maybe the lesson to draw from that winter break is that I _can_ occasionally enter "monk mode," or at least extend the periods during which I'm comfortable, in this state of lockdown, doing what I set out to do, unperturbed by the apparent sameness of it all, despite what my biology might reactively, superficially suggest. And maybe trying this out, putting it into practice, will bear fruit even after the lockdown ends.